<<<<<<< HEAD
===============================================================
This repository contains documents pertaining to the Course Project for the "GETTING AND CLEANING DATA" Coursera class.  The documents are:

        1) "run_analysis.R"  -the script 
        2) "CodeBook.md"     -the codebook which describes the variables and providesinformation about the experimental data
        3) README.md         -this file
=================================================================


INFORMATION ABOUT THE R SCRIPT: "run.analysis.R"

	The script assumes that the original data (https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip) has been downloaded and unzipped in the working directory.  

	The downloaded data is the "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset, Version 1.0" dataset.  Briefly, the researchers carried out experiments with a group of 30 volunteers aged 19 to 48.  "Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, (the researchers) captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz" (the quoted section was reproduced from the original README document in the downloaded dataset).  
	The experimental data and associated means and standard deviation variables are located in the X_test.txt and X_train.txt files: each record is a 561-feature vector and the labels for these 561 variables is contained in the features.txt file. The train data was generated by selecting 70% of the volunteers to perform the experimental tasks; the test data was generated by selecting 30% of the volunteers to perform the experimental tasks.

	Unzipping the downloaded data creates a folder (or directory) called "UCI HAR Dataset" in the working directory.  The "UCI HAR Dataset" contains multiple files.  At the very least, the following files must be present in the "YourWorkingDirectory/UCI HAR Dataset" directory for the script to run:
		- features.txt
		- test/subject.txt
		- test/X_test.txt
		- test/y_test.txt
		- train/subject.txt
		- train/X_train.txt
		- train/y_train.txt

For convenience, the dplyr library is loaded by the script.


WHAT THE SCRIPT ACCOMPLISHES: 

The script "run_analysis.R" reads the above files in R and merges the data in the following manner:

	1) Variable labels from the features.txt file are used to create column names in the X_train and x_test datasets. The X_train dataframe has 7352 rows and 561 columns; the X_test dataframe has 2947 rows and 561 columns.

        2) A new column (1st) containing the subject identifiers is added to the X_train and X_test datasets, using column 2 of the subject_train and subject_test dataframes, respectively.

	3) The activity codes, contained in the y_test and y_train datasets is added as a new column in the the X_test and X_train datasets, respectively.

	4) Activity labels matching the activity codes are added as a new column to the X_test and X_train datasets.

        5) A column named “type” and listing "TRAIN" or "TEST" is added to the X_train and X_test datasets, respectively.  

	6) The X_train and X_test datasets are then merged using rbind().  The resulting dataframe has 10229 rows and 565 columns.

        7) A smaller dataframe is created by selecting specific variables which represent means and standard deviations (see CodeBook.md located in this repository for specific 	information).  The following 12 variables were selected in addition to the “subject”, “Activity” and “type” variables:

			tBodyAccMag-mean() 
			tBodyAccMag-std()  
			tGravityAccMag-mean()   
			tGravityAccMag-std()  
			tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()   
			tBodyAccJerkMag-std()    
			tBodyGyroMag-mean()   
			tBodyGyroMag-std()   
			tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()   
			tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()   
			fBodyAccMag-mean()   
			fBodyAccMag-std()   

        8) The mean of each one of the above 12 variables was calculated for each activity and each subject.  The final dataframe, containing the means of the 12 variables tabulated by activity and by subject, was written to the working directory as text file "result.txt" using write.table().
	


INFORMATION ABOUT CODEBOOK "CodeBook.md"

The codebook included in the repository provides information about the variables, the summary choices made for the tidy dataset produced by the above script, and the experimental design.
=======

CODEBOOK
Course Project - "GETTING AND CLEANING DATA", COURSERA/Data Science
===========================================================================================
There are two sections in this document:
Section 1: Study Design   -Briefly describes how the original research study was conducted
Section 2: Code Book      -Describes the variables in the original dataset with an update indicating all the variables and summaries calculated in the tidy dataset.


SECTION 1: STUDY DESIGN
The downloaded data is the "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset, Version 1.0" dataset.  Briefly, the researchers carried out experiments with a group of 30 volunteers aged 19 to 48.  "Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, (the researchers) captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz" (the quoted section was reproduced from the original README document in the downloaded dataset).  
The experimental data and associated means and standard deviation variables are located in the X_test.txt and X_train.txt files: each record is a 561-feature vector and the labels for these 561 variables is contained in the features.txt file. The train data was generated by selecting 70% of the volunteers to perform the experimental tasks; the test data was generated by selecting 30% of the volunteers to perform the experimental tasks.


SECTION 2:CODE BOOK
2.1 The variables in the original dataset (x_train and x_test files)
The analysis performed by the script included in this repository uses the "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset, Version 1.0" dataset.  The experimental variables in this dataset were collected using the accelerometer and gyroscope capabilities of a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) worn by the test subjects.
The complete list of 561 features is available in the feature.txt file. These variables include the following subsets:
- The accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw time domain signals (as denoted by the prefix "t"). These are the features tAcc-XYZ, tGyro-XYZ and associated single directional components (in -X, -Y, and -Z). These signals were captured at 50 Hz, then filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise.
- The tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ features were obtained from the acceleration signals using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

- Jerk signals tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ were obtained from the body linear acceleration and angular velocity by derivation in time.

- tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag are the magnitude of the body linear acceleration and angular velocity calculated using the Euclidean norm.

-fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag were obtained by applying Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals ("f" denotes frequency domain signals).

In summary, the following variables were estimated from the signals as described above:

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag,

as well as the following quantities, executed on the above list of features: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.
 
- gravityMean, tBodyAccMean, tBodyAccJerkMean, tBodyGyroMean, tBodyGyroJerkMean were obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle().

- type  is the descriptive indicating whether the data in the tidy dataset came from the "training" or "test" datasets in "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset, Version 1.0" .  The type variable has two values:
	TRAIN
	TEST


2.2 The summary variables in the tidy dataset submitted in GiHub as part of this assignment
- subject  is the variable containing the subject id code (number between 1 and 30)
- Activity is the descriptive activity label corresponding to the activity code provided in the original dataset.  The Activity values are as follows:
	1 WALKING
	2 WALKING_UPSTAIRS
	3 WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
	4 SITTING
	5 STANDING
	6 LAYING

- Variables selected from the list of 561 features because they pertain to means and standard deviations, as specified in the Course Project description.  The means of each of the following 12 variables are featured in the "result.txt" output file of the script included in this repository.
	-> The 5 variables Mean_tBodyAccMag, 	Mean_tGravityAccMag, Mean_tBodyAccJerkMag, 	Mean_tBodyGyroMag, Mean_tBodyGyroJerkMag are the respective mean of the magnitude of the body linear acceleration and angular velocity calculated using the Euclidean norm (which in turn were obtained from the body linear acceleration and angular velocity by	derivation in time).


-> The 5 variables StDev_tBodyAccMag, StDev_tGravityAccMag, StDevtBodyAccJerkMag, StDev_tBodyGyroMag, StDev_tBodyGyroJerkMag are the respective standard deviations of the body linear acceleration and angular velocity calculated using the Euclidean norm (which in turn were obtained from the body linear acceleration and angular velocity by derivation in time). 

-> The 2 variables Mean_fBodyAccMag, StDev_fBodyAccMag are the respective mean and standard deviation of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) applied to the tBodyAcc-XYZ feature, which in turn was obtained from the acceleration signals using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz ("f" denotes frequency domain signals).


>>>>>>> 5c3cc68708ee50a14a7a02d981430987535cc801

